---
title: 'Smart Campus App 2.0 - Lessons learnt'
date: 2018-09-09
permalink: /posts/smartcampus-app/
tags:
  - smartcampus
  - bphc
---

A little bit of background: Smart Campus was a student initiative taken up at BPHC a few years ago. It was aimed to better the life on campus through innovative tech. As a part of the Android app development team, we made an app that came into production in 2018. I mainly handled a part of the back end of the app and mostly UI/UX, nothing major back then but, I learned a ton from my senior whom I was working with. Fast forward now, the whole app needed a redesign to accommodate many more features and additions to it and I had to do it alone...

Redesigning the whole app took me 5 days and it felt like a code sprint for me and here’s when I truly realised a few things about importance of things that seem unnecessary but play a major role

1. ****Never Use a Library in it’s alpha and Canary Studio is bad****: While going through the updated material guidelines from Google this year released during the I/O ’18, I was excited to adopt the new components like Chips, updated Material Buttons.I wasn’t ready to refactor all of existing code to AndroidX, so I decided to use the support library for now since it was just a simple one line gradle addition. Here’s when the mess started – this library required the canary version of Android Studio, which was a total mess on my Mac. It was consuming lot of RAM, and runs slower than ever even after limiting its maximum consumption. I ended up restarting studio every 2 hours. The XML attributes in the documentation were hardly present and ended up giving runtime issues all the time. Since they were trivial attributes, I prefer using XML over Java. Also, some attributes that were present, wasn’t being picked up by studio's autocomplete, reason why I'm so lazy. The only solution was to compile, run and hope it doesn't crash. Chips were a disaster during implementation – They weren’t working as expected and the latest version of support library then introduced another attribute which failed to compile every button and chip I used from this library.
2. ****Maintaining code quality, consistency and readability****: I always knew how important this was, but never had an epiphany for it until I perused the previous code. All those doc strings and methods were so precise and clean, I never called my senior up to ask what's or why's of any method.
3. ****RxJava and Realm notifications for the win****: The earlier version of the app only used RxJava to chain request and handle the request errors better. Now, after going through an illustrative tutorial of RxJava here, I realised it’s potential and since realm notifications were primitively using them, I decided I can learn more about these and these very concepts decreased a lot of my code.
4. ****Google’s developer documentation is good, maybe a bit too much****: Integrating Google’s OAuth2 sign in was probably the biggest challenge. Their beginner documentation is just right, it is only after that that there are so many in-depth implementations of it from Google themselves that I couldn’t decide which one to use. It was only after a fortnight or so I came across AccountManager and Credentials API that would have made things easier. Not a single source pointed at these.
5. ****Android Studio’s debugger is the best tool on the IDE****: The debugging feature is a life saver and probably the most underrated feature. There was a massive reduction of timber lines in my code and took that as a positive outcome of using the debugger so frequently.
